Okay, David has started the tape. He needs to check your voice. Could you tell me what
the weather is like out there?
Oh, the weather is more like Seattle than California. It's sort of gray and raw.
Yeah, I'm from near there myself. I grew up in the Sacramento Valley and went to school
at USF.
Uh-huh.
Yeah, I have a cousin who lives in Mill Valley. That's not too far from there, is it?
No, we're over in the East Bay actually in the suburbs.
Yeah. Do you get into the city very often?
Pardon me?
Do you get into the city very often, San Francisco?
Oh yeah, we get over there fairly often. I mean that's the main reason for living in the area.
Okay.
Um, we okay, David?
Okay, tape is rolling.
Um, regarding your origins as a science fiction writer, I guess in the late 1940s, can you
recall a circumstances that started you off as a writer? Did you for instance start as
a fan or how did you pick up a science fiction?
Oh, well, it happened I had been reading science fiction for quite a few years. Um, I wasn't
a fan because I, in the usual sense of the word, because I didn't know any other people
to speak of who read this stuff. Uh, but I used to write stories as a hobby and, um,
just for my own amusement really. But eventually in Fallon College, I got to talking with a
friend I had then who also read science fiction as it turned out. And in the course of conversation,
an idea developed that I thought would make a good story. So I went ahead and wrote it,
and he, uh, read it and urged me to send it in. So I borrowed a typewriter, not only one
at the time myself, and, um, prepared a manuscript and sent it in. And quite some time went by
I had almost forgotten about it all when much to my surprise I got an acceptance. Um, and
after that I sold a few other things. I was, I was still studying to become a physicist
and graduated, but graduated into a recession when jobs were hard to find. So I thought I'd
be supporting myself for a while as a freelance writer while looking around for more steady
employment. But somehow that while got longer and longer and longer.
Okay, uh, in other words you decided to go to be a full-time writer right after you graduated
from college is really when the decision was made.
I didn't make that decision immediately. I sort of drifted into it in the course of the next year or so.
Uh, the same way as most people really drift into whatever careers they end up in.
Okay, I had, I had a couple questions about your, your future history. Um, yours I believe is a lot
tighter than some of the others that I've read. Did you start off your future history with a deliberate
plan to, uh, you know, with charts, with timelines, with the whole thing, or did it just grow?
Well, this is a rather interesting and, to me, a certainly complicated matter. How much of a story do you want on it?
Oh, I don't know. Just that, uh, just about the origins, maybe the genesis of the, of how you started the,
at the point at which you got the idea you had a future history in hand.
Yeah, okay, well, there have actually been, been two, plus a couple of others that you might,
perhaps call many future histories. That is to say, um, three or four stories on the same timeline no more.
But I started out originally rather early in my career and more or less, uh, inspired by Heinlein's future history
and constructed one of my own, uh, with charts and background material and so on, like his.
Of course, mine was, in mind the events were different, but basically I wanted to do a similar job that is
fictionally tell about the story of mankind from, um, almost the present day, up at least until the early era,
expansion among the stars. This wasn't going to be the only thing I did by any means,
just like as a mob, I would write other things that were not in the series, but, um,
from time to time I'd add something to it, and I did over the years, but gradually for a number of reasons
got less and less interested in continuing and started phasing it out, doing less and less of it.
One reason for being less interested was that as for the early part of it, the reality was catching up with me.
Not only were, uh, public or political events not working out on my timetable, for example World War III did not come off on schedule,
but, um, also it turned out I had failed to foresee a number of scientific and technological developments.
So I was going into other things.
Um, then, but you're probably thinking, no, about this much larger and more enduring project of mine,
which, um, which all has sometimes been called the League and Empire series or something like that.
Um, now that is, has a history much more like that of Topsy, it just grew.
Um, originally I'd written a few stories about Nicholas Van Rijn, and I'd written a few stories about Dominic Flandrey,
who lived in completely different miliars, of course.
And then one day on an impulse, uh, I thought, well gosh, they could be on the same timeline, one living about 500 years after the other.
And through invention of that and one of the, one of the Flandrey stories, and then started fitting in other stories wherever it was convenient.
Uh, you see the thing with the future history is that although each story should of course be readable independently of any others,
and comprehensible and so on, nevertheless, if you have a reader who remembers a number of them, the cross connections will add an extra dimension,
and thereby a hope adds to his enjoyment.
So, I started doing it that way, and after a while realized I had a rather large beast by the tail.
If I was going to stay consistent at all, um, then I had to keep careful notes, and I had to develop a systematic scheme and so on.
And thus over the years one thing led to another, until it all became rather elaborate.
By now it includes, um, oh I think something like 40 separate items, of which probably at least a third or so are full dressed novels.
But I probably carried it about as far as it can go.
I doubt I'll do much more if anything in that line, instead I'd rather go on to something else.
Yeah, the, uh, I've heard it called the first portion of that, the larger future history called the Polysotectic League.
About Von Rine and David Falkane.
Did you model that on European trading leagues during the Renaissance, the history behind that, the model?
Oh, I was drawing some historical parallels, of course.
You could, in the case of that phase of it, you could, you can see some obvious parallels to things like say the medieval Hensiatic League,
and of course also to the Age of Discovery a little later.
On the other hand, when you get into the imperial part of it, say the Dominic Plantry stories, the parallels there, or two other things.
Like, for example, the Byzantines versus the Persians, a conflict which went on for centuries and wore up both parties.
I don't, I've never tried to force these things too much. History never repeats itself exactly.
And for that matter, I don't think that, well, I don't think it ever could repeat itself, that exactly anyway.
A number of the things that I throw in there are not meant to be taken literally.
For example, aristocratic titles and so on. I don't think anybody's ever going to revive them in just that form.
They're just meant to suggest approximate equivalence.
Okay, I imagine that Nicholas von Rhein, I imagine he's been one of your more popular characters in terms of reader response, hasn't he been?
Oh yes, there are some readers who can't stand him, but they don't ignore him either.
And as for the rest, he probably is the most popular character I've ever come up with.
And the first novel about him would be, I think your title was The Man Who Counts, is that correct?
Right.
It's been reissued under that title lately, yes.
Okay, just a brief question about Dominic Flandry.
Of course, in contrast to von Rhein, he's very sophisticated and suave and so forth.
Was there anything of James Bond in him, or am I just reading that in?
Oh no. No, I've been asked this before, and as a matter of fact, the first Flandry story appeared something like 20 years before the first James Bond story did.
If I was modeling on any other character at all, it would probably have had to be somebody like the sink.
Okay.
Then of course, at the end of that historical spectrum that you're giving, I guess, the post empire, in a minst time in the future, I believe, wasn't Starfog, I think the last story in terms of chronology,
where humanities, I guess, it's scattered, they've even forgotten where Earth is.
But there's nothing beyond that that you've written, beyond that chrono, that point?
No, I haven't carried it any further than that.
And as a matter of fact, it gets, after Flandry's period, it begins to become very sporadic.
Oh, for example, readers quite often ask me exactly what did happen after Flandry's lifetime, what did the Terrans and the Merseysins do to each other, what became of all these nearby peoples, etc.
And all I have to say is that I don't know exactly.
These post-imperial stories you're mentioning take place way off on the fringes or even beyond, and there they don't know either.
Okay, to change the subject in a small way here, regarding world building.
I've read your essay on the subject, you know, about building worlds and so forth.
Can you just briefly explain the term and why you've spent so much time world building in your novels and stories?
Well, I mean, alright, the term...
The term simply refers to the construction of an imaginary world as a setting for a story in considerable detail.
Now, what the people have done this, an obvious example, for example, would be J.R.R. Tolkien.
In The Lord of the Rings and Related Stories, he constructs an imaginary world in vast detail, complete down to fine points of the various languages spoken and so on.
So it's... and certainly nothing unique to me in science fiction rather than fantasy.
Hal Clement, of course, has been the master of this sort of thing for many years.
Now, there's probably a two-fold reason or maybe even a three-fold reason for doing it like this.
Well, in the first place it's fun.
I enjoy reading it. I enjoy doing it, and I hope...
It's really quite fascinating to sit down there with your references and your calculator and so on and see the somewhat sometimes unexpected details emerge.
And I hope it's fun for the reader too, afterward.
Then in the second place, I think that...
Nothing helps. It helps stories a great deal to have a background that has worked out in great detail.
After all, we really cannot reasonably expect that any other planet anywhere in the universe will be very much like Earth.
We'll probably be lucky if we find a few where humans can live without artificial help.
And you're certainly not going to have native humans around there or oak trees or rabbits or any other feature that we know here on Earth.
That's just preposterous to suppose on the basis of everything we know about the evolution of life here on Earth.
So, in that case, let's try to set up some of the features which are different.
After all, one reason people read science fiction is precisely that they like to get away from the world around them once in a while and escape into something exotic.
And in my opinion, to the extent that this exotic thing can be made at the same time realistic and convincing, the reader is getting his money's worth.
Okay, both you and Hal Clement, I think, have spoken to this world-building as sort of a game where you see if the reader can find some things about the world maybe that's out of place.
Have you ever gotten responses from readers who have tried to point out perhaps scientific inaccuracies or things of that sort in your novels and stories?
Oh, yes, yes, quite a bit.
As a matter of fact, this sort of thing is what Hal Clement himself has christened the game.
The game consists in an author setting up a world or a situation or something as the very best he can and writing a story about it.
And then that's all he can do. He's made his move and that's it.
And readers are free to thereafter to try to figure out from the story exactly what he had in mind and exactly where he may have gone wrong.
So I've gotten some very interesting mail on technical points.
And yes, sometimes they have indicated to me that I've goofed on this or that detail, but alright. I wonder from that, I don't mind.
That sort of leads me into another question about one of your works, I think, that's extremely well-known, Tau Zero.
Would you agree that, my impression is, I'm not sure that you'd agree with this, it's probably your hardest science story.
It's certainly one of them, yes.
I think of all your books, that probably has the largest scope, I guess, the most grand view of humanity and the universe and so forth.
I suppose you believe in the Big Bang theory about the origin of the universe.
I assume that for purposes of that story.
Yeah. The two characters in that book, Lindgren and Raymont, I took them to be sort of the two sides to human nature, say.
She's a compassionate, emotional, Raymont is more logical and more survival oriented.
Were you perhaps saying that you need both to survive, that both of those people had to pull the ship through so they could perhaps survive?
Well, to some extent, yes, there is a certain symbolism there, but it isn't meant to be taken too literally.
That is to say, I don't write parables or anything like that.
I just try to write stories with people in them who are as real as I can make them.
I was trying to preach any lesson merely to tell a story, but I suppose you could say the story reflects what is after all a very ordinary fact of life,
that it takes more than one kind of person to keep the community going.
Would you say that this plot, as you constructed it in that book and having them see the birth of a new universe and so forth,
is something like that theoretically possible because they never did go beyond the speed of light, if I remember.
Never did go beyond what?
The speed of light. In other words, is the book theoretically possible?
No, I tried to stay strictly within relativistic physics there.
It interested me to push that to the limits without doing anything that any physicist today, even a conservative one, would say was absolutely impossible.
As a matter of fact, I've gotten some arguments since on this detail and that.
Which by the way is one of the things that makes it fun to be a hard science fiction writer. You do get such interesting arguments.
But anyhow, were you trying to make a point beyond that, please?
No, no, I was just basically asking if that kind of, at first glance it seems like an unbelievable thing,
but theoretically then it would be possible if the Big Bang Theory was correct. That could happen.
Well, the theory could be argued and has been argued and I could give you a number of the technical arguments I've gotten,
but unless you have an audience of physicists, your listeners might be left somewhat in the dark.
The thing is I structured that novel very carefully.
If you take a close look at it, for example, you'll see that with a couple of exceptions toward the end,
each chapter takes just about ten times as long in cosmic times as the one before.
In other words, the book is written on a logarithmic scale.
I did that because I got the idea of doing that from Olaf Stapledon and it seemed to be the only way to convey any sense of this enormous span,
and it seems to have worked.
And again, I drew plans for the spacecraft and tried to indicate in some detail exactly how it worked, et cetera, et cetera.
And so about the first third of the book is pretty close to home, really, if you look at it, and doesn't involve much of anything that doesn't seem quite possible in principle right now,
just a matter of improving the engineering a little bit.
Then the next third, of course, gets farther out and begins to push the limits of what physicists would agree was possible.
And as for the last third, you're really getting into a completely speculative area there, because, for example, right now we don't know if the universe is going to recycle or not.
In fact, at the moment, the evidence seems to be slightly against it, but maybe there is enough matter after all, falling around to pull it back together.
And if there is going to be another collapse and another big bang, we don't know exactly what character it will have and so on.
So this is really all rather far out, even though, as I say, I did try at least to keep it within the limits of relativistic mechanics.
This is, as I say, part of the game.
The Hell Klement game, given certain assumptions, just what can you and can you not get away with?
Okay, that's fine. I want to change direction for a second here.
Question about character. I've read critics and readers both who maintain that science fiction is a literature of ideas and plot and that it's notoriously weak on character.
But after reading your work, that's questionable because you never fail to develop people and make them real.
Would you agree that science fiction is generally weak on characterization at the expense of ideas?
Well, science fiction is considered in its entirety everything ever written that you could call science fiction.
It's on the average weak in character, yes, but then so is practically every other kind of fiction you can name, including the so-called mainstream.
You look at the typical novel on today's bestseller list, you know, a here and now novel, whatever it may be.
I don't really find any kind of Dostoevsky in depth in the characters there either.
So about all I really have to say is that some science fiction seems to have had well-developed characters, just as some other kinds of fiction, any other kinds, have had well-developed characters.
And the rest has not.
And after all, character is not the only thing in the universe there is to write about.
This is one fallacy that literary critics seem to be hung up on.
You don't get Dostoevsky in depth of character either in Homer, for example, but that's still great literature.
It simply deals with other aspects of reality.
I don't think you can compress the entire universe into any one work of literature.
The universe is just too big and complicated.
So you'll have to decide what aspect you want to concentrate on.
Okay, let me switch to another aspect of your work.
This is one that particularly fascinates me as your use of ancient history, myth, legend, the Middle Ages, things of that sort.
I assume that you sort of grew up with an interest in that area.
Oh, yes.
I mean, do you do research to get that kind of background or do you just naturally have it?
Oh, it depends.
If I happen to have the information for something at my fingertips,
well, as a matter of fact, if I happen to have the information at my fingertips,
then I have learned to tell myself, oh boy, better check that again,
because very often a lot of what I know has turned out to be not true.
So I always try to do as much research as possible.
And then of course there are areas that I know very little about to start with and have to study up.
I mean, for example, I have a pretty good background in the archaeology and early history of Northern Europe.
But when I was writing the answer from Atlantis, which is set in the Mediterranean area of the Bronze Age,
then I really had to go out and do an awful lot of study.
What about, pardon me, what about three hearts and three lions?
I imagine that's been one of your most well-received books.
Oh, yes. It's one of the most popular things I've ever done.
And it was a hell of a lot of fun to write, I mean, safe. It just sort of flowed out.
I was going to ask you about Holger. Is it pronounced Holger? Holger Carlson, is that the way?
Well, that's about as close as you can come in English, yes.
Was that based on, I think it was, based on a man of legend and myth?
Yes, the book explicitly says so, that it draws on the medieval legend and the later medieval romances about Oceola d'Unroix.
Who was certainly there in medieval literature, if not in reality?
Of course, in that case, it was a pure romp into a purely imaginary world.
I didn't have to be much concerned with historical facts, only with trying to make the world self-consistent.
Okay, you used the character in another novel, Midsummer Tempest.
That's not exactly a sequel though, is it? You have Holger in the book, but...
Would you repeat, please?
That book of Midsummer Tempest, even though Holger is in it, that's not exactly a sequel, is it?
No, that's kind of a cameo appearance, just for fun.
In other words, since the Shakespearean world was obviously had to be in an alternate universe,
and since Three Hearts and Three Irons had also explicitly been in another universe,
and obviously, likewise, Operation Chaos had been in yet another,
one that seems to have departed from ours about the year 1900,
I thought, oh, what the heck, just for fun, let's tie all these together in one very brief scene
that doesn't commit anybody to anything, and it was just for fun.
Okay.
Yeah, I've heard of those ideas.
One thing that I find unusual in your work, fascinated by it, in fact, is that in some cases you can be a very hard science writer,
but you still have this tremendous knowledge of and use of, say, the Middle Ages.
Do you believe the Middle Ages was a better place for man?
I mean, is your fascination sort of a longing for the kinds of way of life they had, a pre-technological civilization, or?
Oh, no, no, no, good heavens, no.
The Middle, from your viewpoint or mine, it would have been a perfectly gas-play time to be alive in,
unless you happen to be one of the very, very few that were fortunate.
Even men you'd probably have had the teeth wrought out of your head before you were 40 years old,
or, you know, and been lucky to reach, been an old man by the time you were 50, you know, been lucky to reach 60,
been subject to all sorts of filthy things.
Well, not to mention the fact that there have been very, very few eras in history where the average person could consider himself a free man.
As a matter of fact, it's still a rarity today. You and I, as Americans, are exceptionally no-how fortunate we are in that respect.
So, although I am interested in the past, I certainly don't want to romanticize it.
Every once in a while, just for fun, you know, I'll take off in a completely imaginary sort of sanitized thing,
like, well, as in three hearts and three lions, for instance, but then this is, very frankly, a fantasy.
It's not supposed to be anything real.
What about the High Crusade? That book has always fascinated me.
The juxtaposition there, you know, between a primitive society from the Middle Ages and a highly technical galactic civilization,
you weren't making any statement then about technology because the people from the Middle Ages seemed about ready to conquer a galactic empire with swords.
No, no, far from being a statement, that was a book which I enjoyed writing, but became increasingly difficult to write as I went along,
because of course the whole situation is preposterous. The first third of the book or so could happen by a fluke, given the assumptions.
But after that, it gets harder and harder to believe, and I had to work harder and harder to load the dice so that the story would go the way I wanted to.
If you go back and look at it, you'll see that those dice really are very heavily loaded.
But again, it was only intended to be something for fun, for entertainment, not to be taken seriously at all.
Okay, fine.
I noticed in my own personal reading of your work, I noticed an absence of the old science fiction bug-eyed monster type of alien.
Most of the aliens that I recall from your work are fairly peaceful, they're interested in communicating,
and you seem to be writing about the possible benefits between two different species.
Do you think there will be other life in the universe and that it will be friendly, or at least that we can communicate with it meaningfully?
Well, there's no way to tell, of course. We just don't know.
But on the most realistic and conservative basis, yes, it would seem likely that there's a good deal of life out there.
But life is something which happens wherever conditions are right.
It seems to have had a certain inevitability here on Earth.
No, on how many other planets we can't tell, but even if it happens on only 1% of the stars in the galaxy,
you know, one planet for 1% of the stars in the galaxy, that's still an awful lot.
Let's see, that's still a billion planets with life on them in this one galaxy.
And I suspect it could happen oftener than that, but you know, that's kind of a conservative guess.
Out of those, how many produce intelligent life, and out of those, how many produce technological civilizations like ours that could conceivably communicate with us, we don't know.
But you can whittle away a lot of percentage points and still come out with a fair number.
And although I have written stories of postulating situations where there was war and other unpleasantness,
that was again under certain rather special assumptions.
If you try to look at it under the most conservative and believable assumptions, it all seems very unlikely.
You ask yourself what the dickens there would be to fight about.
We probably wouldn't want each other's real estate.
I remarked earlier that it isn't likely there'll be very many planets in the galaxy where people could live or need it.
It seems, by the same token, it seems unlikely that anybody else would covet our real estate.
And it's hard to see what other rivalries we could have.
On the other hand, we could stand again at tremendous amount mutually by exchanging information and ideas and so on.
This has happened throughout terrestrial history.
After all, the most progressive parts of the world have been precisely those where different societies met each other and interacted.
I don't think... I doubt very much that we have anything to do. We have everything to gain.
Specifically, two of your aliens that I have a question about.
Number one is the short story, Kiri.
The short story that you wrote entitled, Kiri.
Yes.
The energy creature named Lucifer.
Now, he was destroyed at the end of the story, correct?
Lucifer.
He was destroyed. Was he not Lucifer?
Oh, yes, of course.
What I wanted to ask, though, about the story was the origin, the genesis of your idea behind that.
Was there any kind of inspiration that made you come up with that particular story?
Yes. As a matter of fact, that story was suggested by something very specific that I read quite a few years ago now, an article in the magazine called Science, which is the journal of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
It was an article I kept on collapsing stars.
So what has since come to be called black holes?
At that time, the term hadn't yet been coined.
And he had some fascinating things to say about what would happen in the vicinity of a black hole.
And I thought, aha, there's a story there.
Let me think a minute.
And that was the story of which came out.
Including the business of the different time scales and so on.
That is, wasn't my idea. That was Dr. Tharnes.
Okay, the other alien or group of aliens were the bird people that you come up with on the planets, the Dio-Medes, Avalon, Aeneas, and so forth.
Where did you get the idea of a civilization of winged beings of that sort?
Right. Would you repeat that, please?
I was just interested in where you got the idea for whole civilizations of winged beings.
Oh, well, as a matter of fact, that's a rather long story in itself and illustrates how complicated the origins of such things often are.
Way back when, many years ago, I mean, many years ago, it's about 40 by now,
Elsbrey the camp had published an article on intelligent non-human beings.
Where he used basic physical principles to demolish a number of notions, you know, like the idea of a giant insect and so on.
It's just impossible. It would collapse under its own weight because it hasn't got the structure to support that weight.
Things like that.
And one thing he doubted was that you could have an intelligent being which flies because the wing loading that a living flyer can absorb is a take.
It's so small that there just wouldn't be room for a sizable brain.
You pointed out that the biggest flying creature we've got, the California condor, weighs only about 25 pounds.
That doesn't leave much room for brains.
Well, science fiction writers tend to take this sort of a thing as a challenge.
And so when I wrote The Man Who Counts quite a while ago, I did have wing intelligent beings, but I designed a planet such that it had a very dense atmosphere,
which of course would make it easier to get about in the air.
I also made them essentially six-limbed so that they could have not only wings but legs and hands.
Well, afterward I got to thinking that that had been kind of a cop-out. Couldn't there be some way to do it better?
Could it conceivably be done on an earth-like planet? I couldn't see any way.
The camps arguments were there and they made sense.
Well, when it happened, the very last time I saw the Lake John W. Campbell, I was in New York and visited his office and we went out to lunch together.
This was not long before his death.
And we sat there talking and I raised the question just off the top of my head.
Look, let's say that amphibians are post-pissing, post-fish, and reptiles are post-amphibian, and mammalians are post-reptilian.
What would a post-memalian animal be like?
Well, the first thing he said was it would be intelligent and it's us.
And I said, no, no, no, that wasn't what I was thinking about.
Suppose there were no intelligence, what would such a thing be like physically?
And he immediately said, well, suppose it had some sort of light-driven supercharging bellows that would give a tremendous curse of ability.
And I immediately saw that this was a way to power a winged animal, give it sufficient energy that it actually could fly in an atmosphere like our own.
Although it might weigh as much as 100 tons.